Initial PR for biobakery nextflow pipeline (#1)
BonhamLab/biobakery-nextflow-fork: README.md

# Nextflow pipeline for running the bioBakery

by Kevin Bonham, PhD 

[bioBakery](https://github.com/biobakery): software, documentation, and tutorials for microbial community profiling (created and mantained by the Huttenhower lab)

- [`KneadData`](https://github.com/biobakery/kneaddata): 
  a data quality-control pipeline that trims low quality reads
  and removes host genomic data within our metagenomic samples.
  Particularly, this pipeline uses a database containing a reference human genome
  so that all human DNA is removed from the samples.
  Link to more information here: (https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/kneaddata/).

> - [`MetaPhlAn`](https://github.com/biobakery/MetaPhlAn): a computational tool for species-level microbial profiling (bacteria, archaea, eukaryotes, and viruses) from metagenomic shotgun sequencing data. Link to more information here:(https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/metaphlan)
> - [`HUMAnN`](https://github.com/biobakery/humann): a pipeline for efficiently and accurately profiling the presence/absence and abundance of microbial pathways in a community from metagenomic or metatranscriptomic sequencing data (typically millions of short DNA/RNA reads). This process, referred to as functional profiling, aims to describe the metabolic potential of a microbial community and its members. Link to more information here:(https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/humann)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`MetaPhlAn`](https://github.com/biobakery/MetaPhlAn): 
  a computational tool for species-level microbial profiling (bacteria, archaea, eukaryotes, and viruses)
  from metagenomic shotgun sequencing data.
  Link to more information here:(https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/metaphlan)
- [`HUMAnN`](https://github.com/biobakery/humann): 
  a pipeline for efficiently and accurately profiling the presence/absence and abundance of microbial pathways
  in a community from metagenomic or metatranscriptomic sequencing data
  (typically millions of short DNA/RNA reads).
  This process, referred to as functional profiling,
  aims to describe the metabolic potential of a microbial community and its members.
  Link to more information here:(https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/humann)
```

## Environment setup
Instructions for setting up a local environment to run the pipeline can be found on Danielle's notebook [here](https://github.com/BonhamLab/daniellepinto/blob/main/PeriodicMeetings/2025-06-17.md#danielles-personal-notes). 

Computing environments on the Tufts HPC and AWS should already be set-up with container-based (docker, apptainer) or conda environments.

## Running the pipeline
This nextflow pipeline can be run on three different types of machines: 
1) Locally
2) Tufts high performance cluster (HPC)
3) Amazon website services cloud (AWS)

Based on the profiles described in `nextflow.config`, we can run the pipeline with the following Nextflow commands:

### Running locally
`nextflow run main.nf -profile local -params-file params.yaml` 

### Running on the HPC

Jobs on the Tufts HPC can be run in two different ways:

- **Batch**: the job will be sent to the queue
  and it will be completed based on how many resources you have requested,
  current cluster load,
  and fairshare (have you recently used the cluster) 

> - **Preempt**: this allows you to run your job preemptively using free nodes from another lab that paid for these compute resources. However, if they are already running a job, your job will be killed and you'll have to resubmit it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Preempt**: this allows you to run your job using free nodes from another lab that paid for these compute resources.
  However, if they attempt to queue a job, your job will be preempted and killed, so you'll have to resubmit it.
```

> With how the HPC environment is currently defined in `nextflow.config`, jobs will first be submitted to the batch queue. If there are not any available resources, it will be processed preemptively. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With how the HPC environment is currently defined in `nextflow.config`,
jobs will first be submitted to the `batch` or `preempt` queue, whichever is available first.
```

# Nextflow pipeline for running the bioBakery

by Kevin Bonham, PhD 

[bioBakery](https://github.com/biobakery): software, documentation, and tutorials for microbial community profiling (created and mantained by the Huttenhower lab)

> - [`KneadData`](https://github.com/biobakery/kneaddata): a data quality-control pipeline that removes host genomic data within our metagenomic samples. Particularly, this pipeline uses a database containing a reference human genome so that all human DNA is removed from the samples. Link to more information here: (https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/kneaddata/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [`KneadData`](https://github.com/biobakery/kneaddata): 
  a data quality-control pipeline that trims low quality reads
  and removes host genomic data within our metagenomic samples.
  Particularly, this pipeline uses a database containing a reference human genome
  so that all human DNA is removed from the samples.
  Link to more information here: (https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/kneaddata/).
```

Reviewer: In addition to adding a clause about trimming low quality reads, I'm also adding "semantic line breaks" (https://sembr.org). Basically, markdown (and latex and typst etc) treat vertical whitespace (line breaks) as spaces in the rendered text. By breaking lines into semantic units (roughly clauses), it makes future changes easier to review, since diffs work on the basis of lines

- [`MetaPhlAn`](https://github.com/biobakery/MetaPhlAn): a computational tool for species-level microbial profiling (bacteria, archaea, eukaryotes, and viruses) from metagenomic shotgun sequencing data. Link to more information here:(https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/metaphlan)
- [`HUMAnN`](https://github.com/biobakery/humann): a pipeline for efficiently and accurately profiling the presence/absence and abundance of microbial pathways in a community from metagenomic or metatranscriptomic sequencing data (typically millions of short DNA/RNA reads). This process, referred to as functional profiling, aims to describe the metabolic potential of a microbial community and its members. Link to more information here:(https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/humann)

## Environment setup
Instructions for setting up a local environment to run the pipeline can be found on Danielle's notebook [here](https://github.com/BonhamLab/daniellepinto/blob/main/PeriodicMeetings/2025-06-17.md#danielles-personal-notes). 

> Computing environments on the Tufts HPC and AWS should already be set-up with apptainer environments.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Computing environments on the Tufts HPC and AWS should already be set-up with container-based (docker, apptainer) or conda environments.
```

Reviewer: At some point we should add how this is done. Fine to leave it out of the initial draft

## Running the pipeline
This nextflow pipeline can be run on three different types of machines: 
1) Locally
2) Tufts high performance cluster (HPC)
3) Amazon website services cloud (AWS)

Based on the profiles described in `nextflow.config`, we can run the pipeline with the following Nextflow commands:

> [NEED TO DOUBLE CHECK THIS PART]

Author: I'm not 100% confident on these nextflow commands so would love an extra careful review here.

Reviewer: Looks right to me - I can double check what I've been running

### Running locally
`nextflow run main.nf -profile local -params-file params.yaml` 

### Running on the HPC
Jobs on the Tufts HPC can be run in two different ways:

> - **Batch**: the job will be sent to the queue and it will be completed based on how many resources you have requested, current cluster load, and fairshare (have you recently used the cluster) 

Author: Probably overkill with the details, but you went into detail explaining this, and I found it quite helpful for understanding how the cluster works. I have included a lot of my learnings about the pipeline in this document because I'm sure it would be helpful for a newbie!

Reviewer: Yeah, I am very in favor of overkill

> ### Running on the HPC
> Jobs on the Tufts HPC can be run in two different ways:
> - **Batch**: the job will be sent to the queue and it will be completed based on how many resources you have requested, current cluster load, and fairshare (have you recently used the cluster) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Running on the HPC

Jobs on the Tufts HPC can be run in two different ways:

- **Batch**: the job will be sent to the queue
  and it will be completed based on how many resources you have requested,
  current cluster load,
  and fairshare (have you recently used the cluster) 
```

The line breaks between headers and body, and between body and list are not strictly necessary - they don't change the rendered document, but are easier to read IMO

- **Preempt**: this allows you to run your job preemptively using free nodes from another lab that paid for these compute resources. However, if they are already running a job, your job will be killed and you'll have to resubmit it.

> With how the HPC environment is currently defined in `nextflow.config`, jobs will first be submitted to the batch queue. If there are not any available resources, it will be processed preemptively. 

Author: Is this correct?

- `nextflow run main.nf -profile tufts_hpc -params-file params.yaml` 

### Running on AWS
`nextflow main.nf -profile amazon -params-file params.yaml` 

> Kevin may want to add additional comments here about different ways to run the pipeline

> Note: We can also process samples on the MIT `engaging` cluster, but that should probably not be used without permission

> ## Databases

Author: I'm not confident about all the details in this database section, as I'm not an expert on which software and database versions play nicely together

Several databases must be installed to run this pipeline. 

### Kneaddata
- A database containing a reference human genome so that unwanted human DNA can be removed from our metagenomic samples.
    - The `Homo_sapiens_hg39_T2T_Bowtie2_v0.1` bowtie2 database can be downloaded from [here](https://huttenhower.sph.harvard.edu/kneadData_databases/Homo_sapiens_hg39_T2T_Bowtie2_v0.1.tar.gz).
        - This version of the database can be used for all analyses and there shouldn't be a big need to upgrade the database (unless we have an updated human genome!)
- Other reference databases can be added as well if other types of data want to be removed (eg. human transcriptome, mouse genome, etc.)

### MetaPhlAn
- `mpa_vOct22_CHOCOPhlAnSGB_202403` is the most recent MetaPhlAn database that is compatible with the versions of HUMAnN we are using.

>     - It can be downloaded from [here](http://cmprod1.cibio.unitn.it/biobakery4/metaphlan_databases/).

Reviewer: Or using the metaphlan command `metaphlan --install #args...`

- Note: there is a more up-to-date version (released in January 2025) that we will probably eventually want to shift to once HUMAnN is able to support it.

> ### HUMAnN

Author: I would love more insight into which specific humann database to use and which versions are compatible with which versions of humann!

Reviewer: Me too! It's a bit of a mess. I can follow up with hutlab... I *think* I know

### Overview of parameters in `template-params.yaml`
- `data_type`: type of input data (either `fastq` or `bam`)
- `paired_end`: True or False, given the type of input data
- `metaphlan_ver`: MetaPhlAn software version (either `metaphlan3.1.0` or `metaphlan4`)
- `humann_ver`: HUMAnN3 software version (either `humann3.7` or `humann4_alpha`)
- `readsdir`: path to directory that contains raw data 
- `outdir`: path to directory where processed results will be saved
- `human_genome`: path to directory that contains human reference database used during Kneaddata 
- `metaphlan_db`: path to directory that contains metaphlan databases
- `metaphlan_index`: database version (database must exist within `metaphlan_db`)
- `humann_nucleotide_db`: path to directory containing chocophlan database
- `humann_protein_db`: path to directory containing UniRef database

> - `humann_utility_db`: 

Author: Not sure what this humann database is used for

Reviewer: it has conversions between different protein annotations (eg UniRef90 to KO or EC), and names for all of the different annotations that have them
